[DX-1337, TT-12124] Update rate limiter docs with Fixed Window Rate Limiter (#4630)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/getting-started/key-concepts/rate-limiting.md

Tyk offers the following rate limiting algorithms to protect your APIs:

1. Distributed Rate Limiter. Recommended for most use cases. Implements the [token bucket algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Token_bucket).
2. Redis Rate Limiter. Implements the [sliding window log algorithm](https://developer.redis.com/develop/dotnet/aspnetcore/rate-limiting/sliding-window).
3. Fixed Window Rate Limiter. Implements the [fixed window algorithm](https://redis.io/learn/develop/dotnet/aspnetcore/rate-limiting/fixed-window).

### Distributed Rate Limiter (DRL)

> This is the default rate limiter in Tyk. It is the most performant but has a trade-off that the limit applied is approximate, not exact. To use a less performant, exact rate limiter, review the Redis Rate Limiter below.

Reviewer: @titpetric I think we should mention it's limitation, in that this doesn't work with keep-alive setting, when all traffic goes to only one GW.

Tyk offers the following rate limiting algorithms to protect your APIs:

1. Distributed Rate Limiter. Recommended for most use cases. Implements the [token bucket algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Token_bucket).
2. Redis Rate Limiter. Implements the [sliding window log algorithm](https://developer.redis.com/develop/dotnet/aspnetcore/rate-limiting/sliding-window).
3. Fixed Window Rate Limiter. Implements the [fixed window algorithm](https://redis.io/learn/develop/dotnet/aspnetcore/rate-limiting/fixed-window).

When the rate limits are reached, Tyk will block request with a [429 (Rate Limit Exceeded)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/429) response.

### Distributed Rate Limiter (DRL)

This is the default rate limiting mechanism in Tyk Gateway. It's

> implemented using a token bucket implementation that does not use Redis.

Author: above

In effect, it divides the configured rate limit between the number of
addressable gateway instances. It's characteristics are:

- A rate limit of 100/min with 2 gateways yields 50/min rate per gateway
- Unreliable at low rate limits where requests are not fairly balanced

Distributed Rate Limiting (DRL) systems can face challenges in scenarios
where traffic is not evenly distributed across gateways, such as with
sticky sessions or keepalive connections. These conditions can lead to
certain gateways becoming overloaded while others remain underutilized,
compromising the effectiveness of DRL. This imbalance is particularly
problematic in smaller environments or when traffic inherently favors
certain gateways, leading to premature rate limits on some nodes and
excess capacity on others.

> The Distributed Rate Limiter will be used automatically unless one of the

Author: dismissed, DRL is an abbreviation acronym which shouldn't be repeated with the full name

algorithms are explicitly enabled via configuration.

The DRL implements a token bucket algorithm. It's important to note that
this algorithm will yield approximate results due to the nature of local

> rate limiting.

Author: basically, can reword further if you'd like to

> rate limiting.

Reviewer 2: Yes, please - I think just saying "due to the nature of local rate limiting" makes an assumption that the reader is aware of that nature/the limitations. Perhaps expand a little on this?

> rate limiting.

Reviewer 2: Ignore this.

### Redis Rate Limiter

> This rate limiter implements a sliding window log algorithm:

Author: above

- Using Redis lets any gateway respect a cluster-wide rate limit

> - Requests, including blocked requests, are written to the sliding log

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A record of each request, including blocked requests that return `HTTP 429`, is written to the sliding log in Redis
```

> - The log is always trimmed to the duration of the defined window

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The log is constantly trimmed to the duration of the defined window
- Requests are blocked if the count in the log exceeds the configured rate limit
```

An important behaviour of this rate limiting method is that it blocks
access to the API when the rate exceeds the rate limit and does not let
further API calls through until the rate drops below the specified rate

> limit. For example, if the rate limit is 3000/minute the call rate would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
limit. For example, if the configured rate limit is 3000 requests/minute the call rate would
```

> have to be reduced below 3000 for a whole minute before the HTTP 429

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have to be reduced below 3000 requests/minute for a whole minute before the `HTTP 429`
```

responses stop and traffic is resumed.

> This behaviour is called spike arrest. As the complete request log is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This behaviour is called Spike Arrest and is used to force clients to reduce their request rate as no requests will be accepted until the "spike" ends. As the complete request log is
```
Could we add a link to a definition of Spike Arrest?

Author: We can't link a spike arrest definition without linking to a competitor it seems (no wiki, etc.), but the previous paragraph explains it well. The suggested change doesn't add value, Spike Arrest should not be capitalized (spike = traffic spike, arrest = stop, english).

Reviewer 2: OK... I think I can see the problem here and it's going to need a further overhaul of the page once these technical changes are added. The page needs to be restructured to flow better from a user perspective in terms of what rate limiting is, the different behaviours we offer and when/why a user might choose to use each one. I think we need to change the focus of the terminology away from the implementation/traditional naming and towards the behaviour of each ption. I'll pick this up later, once this PR is merged.

stored in Redis, resource usage when using this rate limiter is high.

> Even during traffic blocking, Redis will use significant resources to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This algorithm will use significant resources on Redis even when blocking requests, as it must
```

maintain the request log, mostly impacting CPU usage. Redis resource
usage increases with traffic therefore shorter `per` values are recommended to
limit the amount of data being stored in Redis.

> This algorithm can be enabled using the following configuration option [enable_redis_rolling_limiter]({{< ref "tyk-oss-gateway/configuration.md#enable_redis_rolling_limiter" >}}).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This algorithm can be enabled via the [enable_redis_rolling_limiter]({{< ref "tyk-oss-gateway/configuration.md#enable_redis_rolling_limiter" >}}) configuration option.
```

> Please see the [Fixed Window Rate Limiter]({{< ref "#fixed-window-rate-limiter" >}}) if you don't want spike arrest behaviour.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please consult our [Fixed Window Rate Limiter]({{< ref "#fixed-window-rate-limiter" >}}) documentation if you wish to avoid spike arrest behaviour.
```

##### Redis Sentinel Rate Limiter

> The Redis Sentinel Rate Limiter option will enable:

Author: @dcs3spp there isn't, and I'm reverting the RRL one

- Writing a sentinel key into Redis when the request limit is reached
- Using the sentinel key to block requests immediately for `per` duration
- Requests, including blocked requests, are written to the sliding log in a background thread

This optimizes the latency for connecting clients, as they don't have to

> wait for the sliding log write to complete. The behaviour still has spike

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
wait for the sliding log write to complete. This algorithm exhibits spike
```

> arrest behaviour, however recovery may take longer as the blocking is in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
arrest behaviour the same as the basic Redis Rate Limiter, however recovery may take longer as the blocking is in
```

> effect for a minimum of the configured `per` duration. Gateway and Redis

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
effect for a minimum of the configured window duration (`per`). Gateway and Redis
```

resource usage is increased with this option.

This option can be enabled using the following configuration option
[enable_sentinel_rate_limiter]({{< ref "/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration.md#enable_sentinel_rate_limiter" >}}).

To optimize performance, you may configure your rate limits with shorter
window duration values (`per`), as that will cause Redis to hold less
data at any given moment.

Performance can be improved by enabling the [enable_non_transactional_rate_limiter]({{< ref "/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration.md#enable_non_transactional_rate_limiter" >}}). This leverages Redis Pipelining to enhance the performance of the Redis operations. Here are the [Redis documentation](https://redis.io/docs/manual/pipelining/) for more information.

> Please see the [Fixed Window Rate Limiter]({{< ref "#fixed-window-rate-limiter" >}}) as an alternative, if Redis performance is an issue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please consider the [Fixed Window Rate Limiter]({{< ref "#fixed-window-rate-limiter" >}}) algorithm as an alternative, if Redis performance is an issue.
```

> ### DRL Threshold

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Distributed Rate Limiter (DRL) Threshold
```

In the section below expand DRL and RRL abbreviations and add backticks consistently for `drl_threshold`

with configuration. Tyk switches between these two modes using the
`drl_threshold` configuration.

The drl_threshold option in a Distributed Rate Limiter (DRL) system is
designed to dynamically switch the rate-limiting algorithm based on the
volume of requests. DRL works by distributing the rate allowance equally
among all gateways in the cluster. For example, with a rate limit of 1000
requests per second and 5 gateways, each gateway can handle 200 requests
per second. This distribution allows for high performance as gateways do
not need to synchronize counters for each request.

DRL assumes an evenly load-balanced environment, which is typically
achieved at a larger scale with sufficient requests. In scenarios with
lower request rates, DRL may generate false positives for rate limits due
to uneven distribution by the load balancer. For instance, with a rate of
10 requests per second across 5 gateways, each gateway would handle only
2 requests per second, making equal distribution unlikely.

To address this, the drl_threshold option allows the system to switch
from DRL to a Redis Rate Limiter for smaller rates. This option sets a

> minimum number of requests per gateway that triggers the Redis rate

Reviewer 3: Captialise Redis Rate Limiter

limiter. For example, if drl_threshold is set to 2, and there are 5
gateways, the DRL algorithm will be used if the rate limit exceeds 10
requests per second. If it is 10 or fewer, the system will fall back to
the Redis Rate Limiter.

See configuration for [DRL Threshold]({{< ref "/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration.md#drl_threshold" >}}) on how to configure it.

### Fixed Window Rate Limiter

The Fixed Window Rate Limiter will limit the number of requests in a
particular window in time. Once the defined rate limit has been reached,
the requests will be blocked for the remainder of the configured window
duration. After the window expires, the counters restart and again allow
requests through.

- The implementation uses a single counter value in Redis

> - The counter expires every configured `per` duration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The counter expires after every configured window (`per`) duration.
```

> The implementation does not handle traffic busts within a window. For any

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The implementation does not handle traffic bursts within a window. For any
```

given `rate` in a window, the requests are processed without delay, until

> the rate limit is reached and requests blocked for the remainder of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the rate limit is reached and requests are blocked for the remainder of the
```

> window.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
window duration.
```

When using this option, resource usage for rate limiting does not
increase with traffic. A simple counter with expiry is created for every
window and removed when the window elapses. Regardless of the traffic
received, Redis is not impacted in a negative way, resource usage remains
constant.

This algorithm can be enabled using the following configuration option [enable_fixed_window_rate_limiter]({{< ref "tyk-oss-gateway/configuration.md#enable_fixed_window_rate_limiter" >}}).

If you need spike arrest behaviour, the [Redis Rate Limiter]({{< ref "#redis-rate-limiter" >}}) should be used.

> ## Rate limiting levels

Reviewer 2: Can you please move this section (and "When might you want to use rate limiting?") above "Types of Rate Limiting"?

Then we have a standard flow:
- What is it 
- Why would you use it
- How does it work

Reviewer 2: Ignore this - I'll work on this in a future PR

The DRL implements a token bucket algorithm. In this case if the request rate is higher than the rate limit it will attempt to let through requests at the specified rate limit. It's important to note that this is the only rate limit method that uses this algorithm and that it will yield approximate results.

### Redis Rate Limiter (RRL)

The Redis Rate Limiter implements a sliding log:

> - Using Redis lets any gateways respect a cluster-wide rate limit

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Using Redis lets any gateway respect a cluster-wide rate limit
```

- Each request gets written into a sliding log in Redis, including blocked requests
- The log is always trimmed to the duration of the defined window

An important behaviour of this rate limiting method is that it blocks
access to the API when the rate exceeds the rate limit and does not let
further API calls through until the rate drops below the specified rate
limit. For example, if the rate limit is 3000/minute the call rate would
have to be reduced below 3000 for a whole minute before the HTTP 429

> responses stop and normal traffic resumes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
responses stop and normal behaviour resumes.
```

This behaviour is called spike arrest. As the complete request log is
stored in Redis, resource usage when using this rate limiter is high.
Even during traffic blocking, Redis will use significant resources to
maintain the request log, mostly impacting CPU usage. Redis resource

> usage increases with traffic and shorter `per` values are recommended to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
usage increases with traffic therefore shorter `per` values are recommended to
```

limit the amount of data being stored in Redis.

This algorithm can be enabled using the following configuration option [enable_redis_rolling_limiter]({{< ref "tyk-oss-gateway/configuration.md#enable_redis_rolling_limiter" >}}).

Please see the [Fixed Window Rate Limiter]({{< ref "#fixed-window-rate-limiter" >}}) if you don't want spike arrest behaviour.

##### Redis Sentinel Rate Limiter

The Redis Sentinel Rate Limiter option will enable:

- Writing a sentinel key into Redis when the request limit is reached
- Using the sentinel key to block requests immediately for `per` duration

> - Each request for the sliding log is written in background, including blocked requests

Reviewer 4: The last bullet point sounds weird, maybe @andyo-tyk  can come up with a better rephrasing.
